First draft of API Docs (#289)
jmorganca/ollama: docs/api.md

[Documentation Home](./README.md)

# API

- [Generate a Prompt](#generate-a-prompt)
- [Create a Model](#create-a-model)
- [List Local Models](#list-local-models)
- [Copy a Model](#copy-a-model)
- [Delete a Model](#delete-a-model)
- [Pull a Model](#pull-a-model)

## Generate a Prompt

**POST /api/generate**

### Description

**Generate** is the main endpoint that you will use when working with Ollama. This is used to generate a response to a prompt sent to a model.

> ### Request

Reviewer: This should mention model options which are the same [Modelfile parameters](https://github.com/jmorganca/ollama/blob/docs/docs/modelfile.md#valid-parameters-and-values)

Author: I was just noticing the options. For some reason I looked right at the generaterequest struct but missed it...must have been the extra line there

The **Generate** endpoint takes a JSON object with the following fields:

```JSON
{

>   "model": "modelname",

Reviewer: Somewhere in this docs it should mention the modelname format

Author: can you clarify

  "prompt": "prompt",
}
```

### Response

The response is a stream of JSON objects with the following fields:

```JSON
{
  "model": "modelname",
  "created_at": "2023-08-04T08:52:19.385406455-07:00"
  "response": "the current token",
  "done": false
}
```

The final response in the stream also includes the context and what is usually seen in the output from verbose mode. For example:

```JSON
{
  "model":"orca",
  "created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:45.499127Z",
  "done":true,
  "total_duration":5589157167,
  "load_duration":3013701500,
  "sample_count":114,
  "sample_duration":81442000,
  "prompt_eval_count":46,
  "prompt_eval_duration":1160282000,
  "eval_count":113,
  "eval_duration":1325948000
}
```

| field                | description                                |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| model                | the name of the model                      |
| created_at           | the time the response was generated        |
| response             | the current token                          |
| done                 | whether the response is complete           |

> | total_duration       | total time spent generating the response   |

Reviewer: This and other duration fields should they're measured in nanoseconds

Author: ok

{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:44.18883Z","response":" appears","done":false}
{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:44.200852Z","response":" blue","done":false}
{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:44.213644Z","response":" because","done":false}
{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:44.225706Z","response":" of","done":false}
{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:44.237686Z","response":" a","done":false}
...
{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:45.487113Z","response":".","done":false}
{"model":"orca","created_at":"2023-08-04T19:22:45.499127Z","done":true,"total_duration":5589157167,"load_duration":3013701500,"sample_count":114,"sample_duration":81442000,"prompt_eval_count":46,"prompt_eval_duration":1160282000,"eval_count":113,"eval_duration":1325948000}
```

## Create a Model

**POST /api/create**

### Description

**Create** takes a path to a Modelfile and creates a model. The Modelfile is documented [here](./modelfile.md).

### Request

The **Create** endpoint takes a JSON object with the following fields:

```JSON
{
  "name": "modelname",

>   "path": "path to Modelfile"

Reviewer: This should mention the Modelfile _should_ be an absolute path and _must_ be accessible on the server. If the path is relative, it must be relative to where the server process started. In most cases, this isn't useful so using an absolute path is highly recommended.

Author: I used absolute path in my example but wasn't sure it was needed. so this makes sense. would ~/mymodelfiles/mymodel/Modelfile work? I guess its not reliable since the server may be run by another user

}
```

### Response

The response is a stream of JSON objects that have a single key/value pair for status. For example:

```JSON
{
  "status": "parsing modelfile"
}
```

### Example

#### Request

```shell
curl --location --request POST 'http://localhost:11434/api/create' \
--header 'Content-Type: text/plain' \
--data-raw '{
    "name": "myCoolModel",
    "path": "/Users/matt/ollamamodelfiles/sentiments"
}'
```

#### Response

```JSON
{"status":"parsing modelfile"}
{"status":"looking for model"}
{"status":"creating model template layer"}
{"status":"creating config layer"}
{"status":"using already created layer sha256:e84705205f71dd55be7b24a778f248f0eda9999a125d313358c087e092d83148"}
{"status":"using already created layer sha256:93ca9b3d83dc541f11062c0b994ae66a7b327146f59a9564aafef4a4c15d1ef5"}
{"status":"writing layer sha256:d3fe6fb39620a477da7720c5fa00abe269a018a9675a726320e18122b7142ee7"}
{"status":"writing layer sha256:16cc83359b0395026878b41662f7caef433f5260b5d49a3257312b6417b7d8a8"}
{"status":"writing manifest"}
{"status":"success"}
```

## List Local Models

**GET /api/tags**

### Description

> **List** will list out all the models on the that have been created or pulled locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**List** will list out the models that are available locally.
```

```

#### Response

```JSON
{
    "models": [
        {
            "name": "llama2:70b",
            "modified_at": "2023-08-04T08:52:19.385406455-07:00",
            "size": 38871966966
        },
        {
            "name": "llama2:70b-chat-q4_0",
            "modified_at": "2023-08-04T09:21:27.703371485-07:00",
            "size": 38871974480
        },
        {
            "name": "midjourney-prompter:latest",
            "modified_at": "2023-08-04T08:45:46.399609053-07:00",
            "size": 7323311708
        },
        {
            "name": "raycast_orca:3b",
            "modified_at": "2023-08-04T06:23:20.10832636-07:00",
            "size": 1928446602
        },
        {
            "name": "stablebeluga:13b-q4_K_M",
            "modified_at": "2023-08-04T09:48:26.416547463-07:00",
            "size": 7865679045
        }
    ]
}
```

## Copy a Model

**POST /api/copy**

### Description

**Copy** will copy a model from one name to another. This is useful for creating a new model from an existing model. It is often used as the first step to renaming a model.

### Request

The **Copy** endpoint takes a JSON object with the following fields:

```JSON
{

>   "from": "modelname",
>   "to": "newmodelname"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "source": "modelname",
  "destination": "newmodelname"
```

}
```

### Response

There is no response other than a 200 status code.

### Example

#### Request

```shell
curl --location --request POST 'http://localhost:11434/api/copy' \
--header 'Content-Type: text/plain' \
--data-raw '{
    "source": "MyCoolModel",
    "destination": "ADifferentModel"
}'
```

#### Response

No response is returned other than a 200 status code.

## Delete a Model

> **DEL /api/delete**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**DELETE /api/delete**
```

### Description

**Delete** will delete a model from the local machine. This is useful for cleaning up models that are no longer needed.

### Request

The **Delete** endpoint takes a JSON object with a single key/value pair for modelname. For example:

```JSON
{
  "model": "modelname"
}
```

### Response

No response is returned other than a 200 status code.

### Example

#### Request

```shell
curl --location --request DELETE 'http://localhost:11434/api/delete' \
--header 'Content-Type: text/plain' \
--data-raw '{
    "name": "adifferentModel"
}'
```

#### Response

No response is returned other than a 200 status code.

## Pull a Model

**POST /api/pull**

### Description

**Pull** will pull a model from a remote registry. This is useful for getting a model from the Ollama registry and in the future from alternate registries.

### Request

The **Pull** endpoint takes a JSON object with the following fields:

```JSON
{
  "name": "modelname",

>   "registry": "registryname"

Reviewer: This isn't an option

Author: weird, i didn't think i put that in there. I was thinking it...

}
```

### Response

The response is a stream of JSON objects with the following format:

```JSON
{
  "status":"downloading digestname",
  "digest":"digestname",
  "total":2142590208

> }

Reviewer: Importantly, this also reports `completed` in bytes

Author: are all completeds in bytes?

--data-raw '{
    "name": "myCoolModel",
    "path": "/Users/matt/ollamamodelfiles/sentiments"
}'
```

#### Response

```JSON
{"status":"parsing modelfile"}
{"status":"looking for model"}
{"status":"creating model template layer"}
{"status":"creating config layer"}
{"status":"using already created layer sha256:e84705205f71dd55be7b24a778f248f0eda9999a125d313358c087e092d83148"}
{"status":"using already created layer sha256:93ca9b3d83dc541f11062c0b994ae66a7b327146f59a9564aafef4a4c15d1ef5"}
{"status":"writing layer sha256:d3fe6fb39620a477da7720c5fa00abe269a018a9675a726320e18122b7142ee7"}
{"status":"writing layer sha256:16cc83359b0395026878b41662f7caef433f5260b5d49a3257312b6417b7d8a8"}
{"status":"writing manifest"}
{"status":"success"}
```

## List Local Models

**GET /api/tags**

### Description

**List** will list out the models that are available locally.

### Request

The **List** endpoint takes no parameters and is a simple GET request.

### Response

The response is a JSON object with a single key/value pair for models. For example:

```JSON
{
  "models": [
    {
      "name": "modelname:tags",
      "modified_at": "2023-08-04T08:52:19.385406455-07:00",

>       "size": size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "size": 7323310500
```

    ]
}
```

## Copy a Model

**POST /api/copy**

### Description

**Copy** will copy a model from one name to another. This is useful for creating a new model from an existing model. It is often used as the first step to renaming a model.

### Request

The **Copy** endpoint takes a JSON object with the following fields:

```JSON
{
  "source": "modelname",
  "destination": "newmodelname"
}
```

### Response

There is no response other than a 200 status code.

### Example

#### Request

```shell
curl --location --request POST 'http://localhost:11434/api/copy' \
--header 'Content-Type: text/plain' \
--data-raw '{
    "source": "MyCoolModel",
    "destination": "ADifferentModel"
}'
```

#### Response

No response is returned other than a 200 status code.

## Delete a Model

**DELETE /api/delete**

### Description

**Delete** will delete a model from the local machine. This is useful for cleaning up models that are no longer needed.

### Request

The **Delete** endpoint takes a JSON object with a single key/value pair for modelname. For example:

```JSON
{
  "model": "modelname"
}
```

### Response

No response is returned other than a 200 status code.

### Example

#### Request

> ```shell
> curl --location --request DELETE 'http://localhost:11434/api/delete' \
> --header 'Content-Type: text/plain' \
> --data-raw '{
>     "name": "adifferentModel"
> }'
> ```

Reviewer 2: We can simplify the curl examples in the doc to be like:

```suggestion
curl -X DELETE http://localhost:11434/api/delete -d '{
    "name": "adifferentModel"
}'
```
